#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass memoir
\begin_preamble

%\usepackage[cache=false]{minted}
%\usepackage{tikz}
\usepackage{color}
%\usetikzlibrary{shapes,arrows,calc}

\usepackage[bold]{hhtensor} % options:bold, arrow, uline
\usepackage{physics}
\usepackage{siunitx}

\makeevenhead{headings}{}{}{\thepage}
\makeoddhead{headings}{}{}{\thepage}
\makeevenfoot{headings}{}{}{}
\makeoddfoot{headings}{}{}{}

\copypagestyle{chapter}{plain} 
\makeevenhead{chapter}{}{}{\thepage}
\makeoddhead{chapter}{}{}{\thepage}
\makeevenfoot{chapter}{}{}{}
\makeoddfoot{chapter}{}{}{}

\usepackage{ifthen}
\renewenvironment{figure}[1][]{%
 \ifthenelse{\equal{#1}{}}{%
   \@float{figure}
 }{%
   \@float{figure}[#1]%
 }%
 \centering
}{%
 \end@float
}


\renewenvironment{table}[1][]{%
 \ifthenelse{\equal{#1}{}}{%
   \@float{table}
 }{%
   \@float{table}[#1]%
 }%
 \centering
}{%
 \end@float
}

\renewcommand{\maketitle}{%
    \let\footnotesize\small \let\footnoterule\relax 
	\setcounter{page}{0}
	\thispagestyle{empty}%
	% Cleo wants the title page to start higher 
	%\null\vskip1in%
	\begin{center}
		\LARGE{\textbf{\expandafter{\@title}}}
% original:	{\Bold\uppercase\expandafter{\@title}}
	\end{center}
	\vfill
	\begin{center}
		\textrm{By}\\
		{\textbf{\@author}}\\
	\end{center}
	\vfill
	\begin{center}
		\textsc{A \expandafter{dissertation} submitted in partial 
		fulfillment of the \\
		requirements for the degree of}
	\end{center}
	\vfill
	\begin{center}
		\textsc{ Doctor of Philosophy \\
		(\expandafter{Engineering Mechanics})}
        \end{center}
	\vfill
	\begin{center}
		at the \\
		\textbf{UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN -- MADISON}\\
		%\@submitdate\\
		\expandafter{2023}
	\end{center}\vskip.5in
	\noindent Date of final oral examination: 05/30/2023\\ %\hspace*{\fill} 
\vspace{-8bp}\noindent This dissertation is approved by the following members of the Final Oral Committee:\\
\vspace{-8bp}\hspace{12bp} Riccardo Bonazza, Professor, Mechanical Engineering\\
\vspace{-8bp}\hspace{12bp} David A. Rothamer, Professor, Mechanical Engineering\\
\vspace{-8bp}\hspace{12bp} Jennifer A. Franck, Asst. Professor, Mechanical Engineering\\
\vspace{-8bp}\hspace{12bp} Fabian Waleffe, Professor, Mathematics\\
\vspace{-8bp}\hspace{12bp} Mario Trujillo, Professor, Mechanical Engineering



\newpage
}
\end_preamble
\options final
\use_default_options false
\begin_modules
customHeadersFooters
todonotes
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "biolinum" "default"
\font_typewriter "beramono" "default"
\font_math "garamondx-ntxm" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype true
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command bibtex
\index_command default
\float_placement t
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing double
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks false
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize letterpaper
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 0
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 0
\use_package stmaryrd 0
\use_package undertilde 0
\cite_engine natbib
\cite_engine_type numerical
\biblio_style plainnat
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 1in
\topmargin 1in
\rightmargin 1in
\bottommargin 1in
\secnumdepth 2
\tocdepth 1
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle headings
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
Conclusions & future work
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This dissertation describes the generation and characterization of inhomogeneous
 gaseous vortex rings as well as the behavior of such rings upon acceleration
 by a planar shock wave.
 Generating these rings necessitated the development of a vortex ring generator
 with precisely repeatable discharge characteristics and timing.
 The design of the generator allows for separation to be maintained between
 the vortex ring gas and the ambient gas up until the time of discharge,
 with the use of tracer species within the vortex ring gas for planar laser-indu
ced fluorescence (PLIF) measurements.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Simultaneous high-speed PLIF & particle image velocimetry (PIV) measurements
 were acquired for the first time for any vortex ring propagation experiment,
 as well as for the first time for any shock-vortex interaction experiment.
 Experiments on shock-vortex ring interactions were conducted at a significantly
 higher Mach number (
\begin_inset Formula $M=2.05$
\end_inset

) than any previous experiment.
 The experiments spanned a broad range of vortex ring properties, with pre-shock
 vortex Reynolds numbers varying from 
\begin_inset Formula $3\times10^{5}$
\end_inset

 to 
\begin_inset Formula $2\times10^{6}$
\end_inset

 and Atwood numbers between 0.06 and 0.66.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The PLIF image sequences were analyzed to determine the evolution of vortex
 ring geometrical parameters and propagation velocity.
 The PIV images were processed to extract velocity and vorticity fields
 in the vicinity of the vortex rings.
 These fields were further processed to calculate integral quantities characteri
stic to vortex rings, including the circulation and core radius.
 These results are summarized below:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The nondimensional ring diameter 
\begin_inset Formula $D/D_{p}$
\end_inset

 is found to depend strongly on Reynolds number at early nondimensional
 times 
\begin_inset Formula $tu_{p}/D_{p}<10$
\end_inset

, with similar ring growth rates after that time.
 A weaker early-time dependence on ring Atwood number is observed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The discrepancy between the ring core propagation velocity 
\begin_inset Formula $U$
\end_inset

 measured from PLIF images and the predicted value of 
\begin_inset Formula $U$
\end_inset

 based on circulation and ring geometrical parameters extracted from PIV
 images is examined.
 An empirical Atwood-number dependent vorticity distribution factor 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi$
\end_inset

 is produced which minimizes the average discrepancy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The pre- and post-shock vortex ring leading edge translational velocity
 histories are extracted from PLIF image sequences, with the velocity jump
 in the frame of bulk fluid motion found to depend strongly on Atwood number.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The pre-shock vortex circulation is calculated both by integration of vorticity
 calculated from PIV images and by rearranging and solving the velocity-geometry
-circulation-Atwood relations mentioned previously.
 A significant unresolved discrepancy is observed between these two alternate
 means of calculation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The shock-induced circulation jump is calculated using direct integral measureme
nt of post-shock vorticity and both pre-shock circulation estimates.
 A strong Atwood number dependence is observed using both approaches, with
 a counterintuitive finding of negative circulation production for 
\begin_inset Formula $A=0.06$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $0.20$
\end_inset

.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Several possible mechanisms of vorticity reduction are explored, with the
 likeliest culprit determined to be opposite-sign vorticity production due
 to shock curvature caused by velocity gradients near the vortex core.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The post-shock evolution of the vortex ring diameter is compared to the
 pre-shock value, and qualitative agreement is found with predictions from
 the computational literature.
 A discontinuity between the pre-shock and post-shock diameters is observed
 for the highest-Atwood case, with a potential explanation given by elevated
 baroclinic vorticity deposition.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Preliminary 2D simulations of vortex-interface-shock interactions are analyzed
 using the same integral measurements described for the PIV data above,
 with the shock-deposited circulation found to agree well with predictions
 adapted from the shock-bubble interaction literature.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Analysis of the experimental data is ongoing, with support expressed by
 postdoctoral mentors for the continuation of the present work.
 A funding request for vortex-interface-shock experiments is presently under
 development at Los Alamos National Laboratory.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Future experimental work should ideally take place in a facility with a
 more tightly-controlled planar shock wave release mechanism.
 The limitations imposed by the uncertainty in shock wave generation time
 in the Wisconsin Shock Tube added significant design and operational complexity
 to the vortex ring generator, and effectively prevented the vortex ring
 Reynolds number from being held constant for a given set of Atwood numbers.
 Tighter primary shock wave timing control would also allow for the study
 of significantly lower vortex Reynolds numbers more characteristic of the
 conditions found at the cores of inertial confinement fusion implosions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Because the primary shock waves in NIF implosions propagate from a heavy
 material to a light material, better applicability to NIF conditions would
 be provided by an experiment with a heavy vortex ring propagating in the
 same direction as the primary shock wave.
 Such a study would be most easily conducted in an upwards-firing shock
 tube to retain gravity's aid in forming a stable stagnation plane.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Great value would be provided by a dual-laser, dual-camera PIV system to
 directly measure both pre- and post-shock circulation and thereby resolve
 much of the uncertainty apparent in pre-shock circulation estimates for
 the present experiments.
 Better yet would be a high-resolution, high-speed PIV system to provide
 direct rather than ensemble measurements of the time evolution of vortex
 integral quantities.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The planar laser-induced fluorescence measurements could be potentially
 improved by seeding the ambient gas instead of the vortex ring gas.
 This inversion would eliminate many of the unknown thermodynamic fluctuations
 within the fluorescing regions and provide a uniform background signal
 to allow the application of standard laser-induced fluorescence signal
 correction techniques.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The limited spatial resolution and 2D geometry of the calculations performed
 for this work should be extended to fully 3-dimensional, high-resolution
 calculations to better capture the small-scale fluctuations which drive
 the mixing of the vortex ring with its surroundings as well as the instabilitie
s that lead to the ring's eventual demise.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
